#### What's the most important crypto-commerce tool to help humans cooperate?

A crypto-native implementation of Valueflows (https://valueflo.ws) and linking of it to traditional accounting tools and marketplace applications, will be the most important crypto-commerce tool for enabling human cooperation.

Valueflows is an extension of the Resources, Events, Agents (REA) accounting model, originally proposed in the 1980s as a new accounting ontology for the computer age. Today, accounting takes the view of a single entity: the "dependent view." Valueflows takes a gods-eye view: the "independent view" (this could also be described as the "supply chain view," or "networked view").

Think of it this way: when you're running a company, you see the economy through the lens of your own company's books. You see incoming resources, outgoing assets, incoming assets, outgoing products, etc. The prices you see for purchased goods offer you no insight and understanding into how they were produced, from where, and further into their own inputs, etc.

When two companies are seeking to do an exchange, they only look at each other through their own "dependent views." This sets up the two companies for an exchange based on distrust and competition: both parties try to get the upper hand on the deal, without tipping their hand to the counter-party. Hardly a space where we can expect much emergent cooperation.

Further, unless a tight relationship is built between the parties or one party holds a position of dominance, there may be no room for negotiating other aspects of the exchange: the material and labor inputs to one party's product for example. The system is setup for an adversarial negotiation over the price and "customer-facing" terms of an exchange only.

With a Valueflows accounting system, both parties of a negotiation could choose to share an "independent view" of the potential exchange. No longer is the only method of exchange an adversarial one, but now, because both parties share the same understanding of the flow of value and resources in the exchange, it becomes possible to cooperatively decide together how to allocate their shared costs and returns. This example can be extrapolated cooperatively managing the series of exchanges which make up a production process, such as a collection of companies in a supply chain.

With this shared accounting space, the flow of resources becomes visible. Each economic event can be traced forwards (to it's final product / output), or backwards (to it's original raw materials / inputs). You can sum up all the inputs to see the total input cost, and compare that to the total revenue (and externalized costs) of the final product. You can generate scheduling plans and GANTT charts to coordinate production among supply chain networks, or use graph analysis algorithms to identify bottlenecks. Many other useful graph analysis algorithms could offer a variety real-world insights when applied to this data model.

Another valuable feature of Valueflows is it can make visible the flows of material resources: from mining and processing of raw minerals, through their consumption or use in a production process, to their final waste products or recycling path back into a production process or storage. It is a critical that the global economy evolves to properly account for limited planetary resources, high value ecological systems, the production processes that convert resources into waste or new resources, and the side-effects of those production processes on the high-value ecological systems. With Valueflows and open-source production process recipes, a huge design space opens up for "supply chain engineering" to minimize waste resources, damage to ecological systems, damage to human life, etc. As well as to maximize restoration of ecological systems, maximize human freedom, etc.

Valueflows also incorporates the definitions of production process (recipes) in it's ontology, offering a new collaboration space around evolving those processes. With a shared language for defining production processes, a new possibility for an "open source production process" movement can arise to evangelize and publish open-source licensed production processes. Now production processes can defined in a global collaboration space: where others can contribute to their experimentation and iteration, with forking and pull requests akin to source code version control. This opens up a huge space of supply-chain design and production process design, where insights can be shared across the economy.

Finally, Valueflows would enable a large scale, credibly neutral, "universal marketplace" system, where anyone can publish their "offers" of things they want to buy or sell, and "commitments" with another party to do an exchange, on a unified data stream. Because of the shared data model, offers could be searched and queried like any traditional B2B or B2C exchange: users could filter and search through available offers to fill their needs, contact the other party, commit to specific exchange price and terms, setup automated escrow, commit to an adjudication system, etc.

This "universal marketplace" could be accessed through a wide range of front-ends, most filtered to only a small subset of the data, and designed specifically to the needs of a particular set of users (i.e. B2B only, vendors in a specific industry, available drivers nearby from a taxi service, the dispatchers in a trucking company, etc.). Thus the user experience of commonly used marketplace apps would not change, but only need to be modified on the back-end to publish data in Valueflows format.

As usage of this "universal marketplace" grows, and more and more available offers of the global economy become queryable as a single graph, the task of implementing a production process can transform to an engineering problem of "circuit design." Components (i.e. other vendors' products, labor, machinery, land, transportation services, etc.) can be pulled off the shelf from the "universal marketplace" and connected to other components to implement a real world production process.

This "universal marketplace" would enable a new, far richer form of network cooperation based on various political philosophies and value sets, where a company could specify to only make its offers available to other companies with specific internal rules (i.e. a specific ownership structure like cooperatives, banning slave-like labor, etc.) .

Valueflows is politically neutral -- it can be used to facilitate coordination within or between many different kinds of economic arrangements: enterprise supply chains, VCs and their start-ups, business partners, counter-parties of an exchange, working groups in DAOs, networks of DAOs, federations of cooperatives, etc. It can offer greater efficiency for savvy partners within this competitive economy, or provide the tools for emergence of a new cooperation economy.

The Valueflows ontology, applied to crypto-commerce tools will be a significant contribution to cooperation economics. It allows for multi-party cooperation with a shared viewpoint, making visible the flows of real resources, making visible the externalities and waste from production processes, facilitating an open-source production process recipes, a circuit design system of supply chain production, and fractal economic networks based on competing political philosophies. Valueflows is a necessary base layer of infrastructure, which opens up a massive, largely unexplored, design space of cooperation economics.